(See Copyright details at the end.)

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642 - 1727)
______________________________

Isaac Newton was born on Christmas Day, 1642, at Woolsthorpe, Lincolnshire.
His family background and early life did not augur well for future greatness.
Newton's father, also named Isaac, was fairly well off but illiterate, and he
died three months before Newton was born.  His mother, Hannah Ayscough,
remaried when Newton was three, only to abandon him on the insistence of his
stepfather.  The boy was left in the care of the Ayscough family, a
circumstance that helped his education (Hannah's brother William had studied
at Cambridge, and eventually directed Newton there) but did not compensate
emotionally for the absence of this father and mother.  Newton became
intensely neurotic, secretive, and suspicious in later life; he never married
and tended to make enemies rather than friends.

The young Newton was more interested in building intricate machines, such as
model windmills, than academic studies, though once he set his mind to it he
became top of his school.  In 1661 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a
sizar.  Sizars had to earn their keep as servants to the wealthier students,
and it was indicative of his mother's meanness that he had to become one, for
she could afford to support him but chose not to.  Newton's early studies were
in Aristotle, the standard curriculum of the time.  The first thinker to make
an impression on him was Descartes, whose works were then creating a stir in
Cambridge.  By 1664, in a series of notes he called Quaestiones quaedam
Philosophicae, Newton was absorbed with questions of mechanics, optics, and
the physiology of vision.  He was also struct by Descartes's geometry,
preferring it to Euclid, which in his first encounter "he despised ... as a
trifling book" (according to later reminiscences of de Moivre).

The years 1664 to 1666 were the most important in Newton's mathematical
development and perhaps the most creative period in the life of any
mathematician.  In 1664 he devoured the mathematics of Descartes, Viete, and
Wallis and began his own investigations.  Late in 1664 he conceived the idea
of curvature, from which much of differential geometry was to grow.  The
university was closed in 1665, which was the disastrous plague year in much of
England.  Newton returned to Woolsthorpe, where his mathematical reflections
became an all-consuming passion.  Fifty years later, Newton recalled the time
as follows:

   In the beginning of the year 1665 I found the Method of approximating
   series & the Rule for reducing any dignity of any Binomial into such
   a series.  The same year in May I found the method of Tangents of
   Gregory & Slusius, & in November had the direct method of fluxions &
   the next year in January had the Theory of Colours & in May following
   I had entrance into y^e inverse method of fluxions.  And in the same
   year I began to think of gravity extending to y^e orb of the Moon &
   ... from Keplers rule of the periodical times of Planets ... I 
   deduced that the forces w^(eh) keep the Planets in their Orbs must
   [be] reciprocally as the squares of their distances from the centers
   ... All this was in the two plague years 1665-1666.  For in those
   days I was in the prime of my age for invention & minded Mathematics
   & Philosophy more than [sic] at any time since. [Whiteside 1966]

In addition to the achievements mentioned, Newton's discoveries in this period
included the series for log(1 + x) and, at least in preliminary form, the
classification of cubic curves.

As we have seen, Newton's first attempts to publish his results unsuccessful;
nevertheless, there were some who read them and recognized his genius.  In
1669 the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Trinity, Isaac Barrow, resigned
to devote himself to theology, and Newton was appointed to the chair on
Barrow's recommendation.  Newton held the position until 1696, when he made
the puzzling decision to accept the position of master of the Mint in London.
The outstanding achievement of his Lucasian professorship was the classic
Principia Mathematica (Mathematical principles of natural philosophy).

The Principia, which developed the theory of gravitation based on Newton's
inverse square law of 1665, owes its existence to a visit by Edmund Halley to
Cambridge in 1684.  The hypothesis of the inverse square law was in the air at
this stage - Wren, Hooke, and Halley himself had thought of it - but a
mathematical derivation of its consequences was lacking.  Halley asked Newton
what curve a planet would describe under this law and was delighted to learn
that Newton had calculated it to be an ellipse.  When asked to supply his
demonstration, Newton had some trouble reconstructing it, eventually sending
Halley a nine-page paper, De motu corporum in gyrum (On the motion of bodies
in an orbit), three months later.  De motu was the Principia in embryonic
form.

Realizing the importance of Newton's results, Halley communicated them to the
Royal Society and urged Newton to expand them for publication.  His prodding
came at just the right time.  The excitement over Newton's early discoveries
had died down, and for the preceding six or seven years he had been wasting
his time on alchemical experiments.  With his interest in mathematics
rekindled, Newton devoted the next 18 months almost exclusively to Principia
"so intent, so serious upon his studies, y^t he eat very sparingly, nay,
ofttimes he has forget to eat at all," as a Cambridge contemporary noticed
[Westfall 1980].  When Book I was delivered to the Royal Society in April 1686, they were still
reluctant to publish, and it took heroic efforts from Halley to bring them
round.  He not only risked his own money on the venture, but he had to coax
Newton to go through with it, as Newton flew into tantrums when Hooke raised
his own claims of priority.  Finally in 1687 the Principia was published and
Newton's fame was secure, at least in Britain.

In the early 1690s Newton worked on revising the Principia and bringing some
of his earlier investigations into order.  As we have seen, the final form of
his classification of cubic curves dates from this period.  In 1693 he had a
nervous breakdown, and this may have been a factor that influenced him to
leave Cambridge for the Mint in 1696.  He did not completely abandon science,
becoming president of the Royal Society in 1703, but his mathematical activity
was mainly confined to the priority dispute with Leibniz over the invention of
the calculus.  Newton died in 1727 and was buried in Westminster Abbey.


Copyright
_________

The above bibliographical details about Newton have been take almost verbatim
from [Stillwell 1989], so the copyright remains with that source.

Bibliography
____________

[Stillwell 1989] Mathematics and its History; Springer-Verlag, 1989.

[Whiteside 1966] Newton's marvellous year: 1666 and all that; Notes and 
                 Records, Roy. Soc. Lond., 1966.
[Westfall  1980] Never at Rest; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980.

